MSC2674: Event Relationships (#2674)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2674-event-relationships.md

# MSC2674: Event relationships

It's common to want to send events in Matrix which relate to existing events -
for instance, reactions, edits and even replies/threads.

This proposal is one in a series of proposals that defines a mechanism for
events to relate to each other.  Together, these proposals replace
[MSC1849](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849).

* This proposal defines a standard shape for indicating events which relate to
  other events.
* [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) defines APIs to
  let the server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so
  bundle the related events with the original event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces the concept of relations, which can be used to
associate new information with an existing event.

> Events are said to contain a relationship when their `content` object contains
> a `m.relates_to` object which has both a `rel_type` string field that gives the type
> of relationship being defined, and an `event_id` string field that gives the event
> which is the target of the relation. If any of these conditions is not met,
> clients and servers should treat the event as if it does not contain a relationship.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit verbose now, maybe this is a bit easier to read:

```suggestion
A relationship is an object with a field `rel_type`, which is a string describing the type of relation,
and a field `event_id`, which is a string that represents the event_id of the target of this relation.
Both of those fields are required. An event is said to contain a relationship if their `content` contains
a relationship with all the required fields under the `m.relates_to` key. If any of these conditions is not met,
clients and servers should treat the event as if it does not contain a relationship.
```

I.e. define a relationship first, then define where it is used and what constraints apply. Otherwise reading that has a lot of mental overhead imo and the sentence gets a tad long. I think splitting it up a bit helps, but not so sure, what do you think?

  let the server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so
  bundle the related events with the original event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.
* [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267) defines events
  can make a reference to other events.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces the concept of relations, which can be used to
associate new information with an existing event.

A relationship is an object with a field `rel_type`, which is a string describing the type of relation,
and a field `event_id`, which is a string that represents the event_id of the target of this relation.
Both of those fields are required. An event is said to contain a relationship if their `content` contains
a relationship with all the required fields under the `m.relates_to` key. If any of these conditions is not met,

> clients and servers should treat the event as if it does not contain a relationship.

Reviewer 2: An example would be worth 1000 words here

All the information about the relationship lives under the `m.relates_to` key.

If it helps, you can think of relations as a "subject verb object" triple,
where the subject is the relation event itself; the verb is the `rel_type`
field of the `m.relates_to` and the object is the `event_id` field.

We consciously do not support multiple different relations within a single event,
in order to keep the API simple. Another MSC,
like [MSC 3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051),
can propose a change to add support for multiple relations if it turns out that
this would facilitate certain use cases.

Relations do not yet replace the 

> [reply mechanism currently defined in the spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#rich-replies).

Reviewer 3: So this doesn't get lost to time:
```suggestion
[reply mechanism currently defined in the spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#rich-replies).
```

> [reply mechanism currently defined in the spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#rich-replies).

Reviewer 3: Reassurance about the encryption handling ("Forming relationships between events" in the current spec) would be appreciated. Specifically, whether or not the current spec's requirement that the relationship be *not* encrypted is maintained.

Reviewer 4: This was moved to [MSC 2675](https://github.com/uhoreg/matrix-doc/blob/aggregations-helpers/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#end-to-end-encryption) as this MSC does not assume any server support for relations, which is the only reason to not encrypt relations. Does that address your concern?

### Relation types

This MSC does not define any value for `rel_type`, but rather defines the generic
framework that different kinds of relations have in common and that other MSCs can
build on. Future definitions for values of `rel_type` should describe *how* the server
should aggregate relations on the target event
(as proposed in [MSC 2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)).

> The goals is to make each rel_type as broadly useful as possible,
> and to keep the amount of types for a server implementation to support down to a minimum.

Author: ```suggestion
The goals are to make each `rel_type` as broadly useful as possible,
and to keep the number of types for a server implementation to support down to a minimum.
```

called with a `since` token, and that have `limited: false` in the portion of
response for the given room) as normal discrete Matrix events.

[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) defines ways in
which the server may aid clients in processing relations by aggregating the
events.

### Redactions

Relations may be redacted like any other event.

The `m.relates_to`.`rel_type` and `m.relates_to`.`event_id` fields should
be preserved over redactions, so that clients can still distinguish
redacted relations from other redacted events of the event type.

One example is telling redacted edits (as proposed in
[MSC 2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676)) apart from
from normal redacted messages, and maintain reply ordering.

  FIXME: synapse doesn't do this yet

> This modification to the redaction algorithm requires a new room version.

Reviewer 4: Have filed [an issue for synapse](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/10297) to implement this

Reviewer 5: it needs more than impl tho; it would need a new room version.

> Related events are normal Matrix events, and can be sent by the normal /send

Author: ```suggestion
Related events are normal Matrix events, and can be sent by the normal `/send`
```

[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) defines ways in
which the server may aid clients in processing relations by aggregating the
events.

### Redactions

Relations may be redacted like any other event.

The `m.relates_to`.`rel_type` and `m.relates_to`.`event_id` fields should
be preserved over redactions, so that clients can still distinguish

> redacted relations from other redacted events of the same event type.

Author: How should the redaction algorithm handle "incorrect" `m.relates_to` values?  For example, if `m.relates_to` is an object but doesn't contain the `rel_type` or `event_id` fields.  Or if `m.relates_to` is not an object?

My guess is that in the case that `m.relates_to` is an object but does not contain the fields, then the redacted version should have `m.relates_to` set to the empty object, and in the case that `m.relates_to` is not an object, then it should be omitted from the redacted version.  But we should probably be explicit about these.

Reviewer 6: Since it's a new room version, it could also require `m.relates_to` to be an object and contain the required keys when present

Reviewer 4: Probably not worth blocking redaction on invalid events?
I've added your suggestion @uhoreg, but always suggest to delete `m.relates_to` if it's not an object or would be empty after redacting. Seems simpler, is that ok for you?

One example is telling redacted edits (as proposed in
[MSC 2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676)) apart from
from normal redacted messages, and maintain reply ordering.

This modification to the redaction algorithm requires a new room version.
However, event relationships can still be used in existing room versions, but

> the user experince may worse if redactions are performed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the user experince may be worse if redactions are performed.
```

## Potential issues

### Federation considerations

We have a problem with resynchronising relations after a gap in federation:
We have no way of knowing that an edit happened in the gap to one of the events

> we already have.  So, we'll show inconsistent data until we backfill the gap.

Reviewer 3: fwiw, if the conditions are reversed then the client has a chance to rebuild the mini DAG of events itself through `GET /event`. Much like Element's current reply functionality, if the event misses the cache then it can be fetched. 

This obviously doesn't work in the highlighted bit of the MSC (due to the source of the tree being outside of the gap, and the events stuck in the gap), but it can at least help if the client sees a relation for an event it's never seen before.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure what you mean with "if the conditions are reversed". Also I'm confused how the client can help resolve this federation concern between two servers?

Reviewer 3: July was a really long time ago and I'd love to ask that Travis what he was going on about. Closing until I figure it out.

   pulling the missing ones in.
 * Could we also ask the server, after a gap, to provide all the relations which
   happened during the gap to events whose root preceeded the gap.
   * "Give me all relations which happened between this set of
     forward-extremities when I lost sync, and the point i've rejoined the DAG,
     for events which preceeded the gap"?
   * Would be hard to auth all the relations which this api coughed up.
     * We could auth them based only the auth events of the relation, except we
       lose the context of the nearby DAG which we'd have if it was a normal
       backfilled event.
     * As a result it would be easier for a server to retrospectively lie about
       events on behalf of its users.
     * This probably isn't the end of the world, plus it's more likely to be
       consistent than if we leave a gap.
       * i.e. it's better to consistent with a small chance of being maliciously
         wrong, than inconsistent with a guaranteed chance of being innocently
         wrong.
   * We'd need to worry about pagination.
   * This is probably the best solution, but can also be added as a v2.

>  * In practice this seems to not be an issue, which is worth complicating the s-s API over. Clients very rarely jump over the federation gap to an edit. In most cases they scroll up, which backfills the server and we have all the edits, when we reach the event before the gap.

Author: please wrap this line

 
## Limitations

Based solely on this MSC, relations are only received as discrete events in
the timeline, so clients may only have an incomplete image of all the relations
with an event if they do not fill gaps (syncs with a since token that have 
`limited: true` set in the sync response for a room) in the timeline.

In practice, this has proven not to be too big of a problem, as reactions
(as proposed in [MSC 2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677))
tend to be posted close after the target event in the timeline.

A more complete solution to this has been deferred to
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675). 

## Tradeoffs

### Event shape

Shape of

```json
"content": {
    "m.relates_to": {
        "m.reference": {
            "event_id": "$another:event.com"
        }
    }
}
```
versus

```json
"content": {
    "m.relates_to": {
        "rel_type": "m.reference",
        "event_id": "$another:event.com"
    }
}
```

The reasons to go with `rel_type` is:

>  * this format is now in use in the wider matrix ecosystem without a prefix, in spite of the original MSC 1849 not being merged. This situation is not ideal but we still don't want to break compatibility with several clients.

Author: please wrap this line

 * we don't need the extra indirection to let multiple relations apply to a given pair of

>    events, as that should be expressed as separate relation events.

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand this - it's still a problem if you want multiple outgoing relations from an event? (Multiple incoming relations is obviously fine)

Reviewer 7: If this is the case, i'd like to say that only being able to attach 1 relation to a message would be antithetical to future expansion and implementation in features, because now you cannot attach mutually occuring metadata with eachother (such as replies in a thread)

though maybe @deepbluev7 knows something about this

Reviewer: The above sentence means that multiple relations are not a design goal. If you want multiple relations, you just send multiple events instead. I do disagree with that, which is why I made #3051 . Note that #3051 also uses `rel_type`, but it just puts the relations in a list, so you can even have multiple relations of the same type.

Reviewer 4: What @deepbluev7 said, does that make sense @dbkr?

 * if we want 'adverbs' to apply to 'verbs' in the subject-verb-object triples which
   relations form, then we apply it as mixins to the relation data itself rather than trying
   to construct subject-verb-verb-object sentences.
 * so, we should pick a simpler shape rather than inheriting the mistakes of m.in_reply_to
   and we have to keep ugly backwards compatibility around for m.in_reply_to
   but we can entirely separately worry about migrating replies to new-style-aggregations in future

>    perhaps at the same time as doing threads.

Reviewer 2: I'm confused here too: we're avoiding inheriting the mistakes but the first bullet justifies this approach because it's already in use? Are they talking about different things?

Reviewer 4: Agreed this could be worded better, but yes, they are talking about different things.

The first point talks about MSC 1849 relations, and how they are already in widespread use, and we don't want to break compatibility with those.

This point talks about not inheriting the mistakes from the m.reply_to format, which is different from MSC 1849 relations.

Reviewer 4: I have tried to clarify this in f24945e, lmk if you want further changes.

## Historical context

pik's MSC441 has:

Define the JSON schema for the aggregation event, so the server can work out
which fields should be aggregated.

```json
"type": "m.room._aggregation.emoticon",
"content": {
    "emoticon": "::smile::",
    "msgtype": "?",
    "target_id": "$another:event.com"
}
```

> These would then aggregated, based on target_id, and returned as annotations on

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
These would then be aggregated, based on target_id, and returned as annotations on
```

* This proposal defines a standard shape for indicating events which relate to
  other events.
* [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) defines APIs to
  let the server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so
  bundle the related events with the original event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.
* [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267) defines how events
  can make a reference to other events.
* [MSC3389](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3389) defines changes to
  the redaction algorithm, to preserve the type and target id of a relation.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces the concept of relations, which can be used to
associate new information with an existing event.

A relationship is an object with a field `rel_type`, which is a string describing the type of relation,

> and a field `event_id`, which is a string that represents the event_id of the target of this relation.

Reviewer 4: I think we can leave relating to events in other rooms up to another MSC, and for now say it must be the same room.
I don't think any client currently forwards an event? Replies, yes, and once those make use of relations as proposed here, the correct thing to do would probably be either define relating to events in other rooms in a new MSC or remove the reply relation. Wdyt?

If it helps, you can think of relations as a "subject verb object" triple,
where the subject is the relation event itself; the verb is the `rel_type`
field of the `m.relates_to` and the object is the `event_id` field.

We consciously do not support multiple different relations within a single event,
in order to keep the API simple. Another MSC,
like [MSC 3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051),
can propose a change to add support for multiple relations if it turns out that
this would facilitate certain use cases.

Relations do not yet replace the 
[reply mechanism currently defined in the spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#rich-replies).

### Relation types

This MSC does not define any value for `rel_type`, but rather defines the generic
framework that different kinds of relations have in common and that other MSCs can
build on. Future definitions for values of `rel_type` should describe *how* the server
should aggregate relations on the target event
(as proposed in [MSC 2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)).
The goal is to make each `rel_type` as broadly useful as possible,

> and to keep the number of types for a server implementation to support down to a minimum.

Reviewer 4: I would appreciate some input here, as I think this might be the most contested part of the MSC; approaches that go somewhat against this rule of thumb have been proposed in other MSCs. My biggest doubt here is that [the server endpoint in MSC 2675](https://github.com/uhoreg/matrix-doc/blob/aggregations-helpers/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#paginating-relations-and-aggregations) to get relations for an event won't be able to filter by these subtypes, so if clients want to make use of that API, they might be forced to fetch more relations than they really need for their use case (e.g. fetch all `m.reference` events, even the ones that are not replies or thread entries)

Reviewer: In my opinion the server doesn't need to know all the aggregation types to calculate aggregations, see also my comment here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675#discussion_r707167326

So it would make most sense to have specific rel_types for specific use cases.

Reviewer 8: Isn't this a topic for debate in #2675 anyway?

Reviewer: @richvdh I think this MSC should provide some guidance on how a relationship verb should be chosen. Otherwise we just end up using m.reference everywhere or alternativey m.highly_specific_thing

  let the server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so
  bundle the related events with the original event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.
* [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267) defines how events
  can make a reference to other events.
* [MSC3389](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3389) defines changes to
  the redaction algorithm, to preserve the type and target id of a relation.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces the concept of relations, which can be used to
associate new information with an existing event.

A relationship is an object with a field `rel_type`, which is a string describing the type of relation,
and a field `event_id`, which is a string that represents the event_id of the target event of this relation.
The target event must exist in the same room as the relating event is sent.

> Both of those fields are required. An event is said to contain a relationship if their `content` contains

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Both of those fields are required. An event is said to contain a relationship if its `content` contains
```

a relationship with all the required fields under the `m.relates_to` key. If any of these conditions is not met,

> clients and servers should treat the event as if it does not contain a relationship.

Reviewer 8: I'm not sure that this needs to be in this MSC, but for links: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2178 questions whether it is correct for a server to accept a malformed relationship over the C-S API.

Reviewer 3: ftr, I don't think it's this MSC's responsibility to answer this concern. Relationships are already specified in the protocol, but this MSC has awkward wording to make it appear as though it is introducing the concept. Neither describe what should happen on invalid relationships, but we also don't define what should happen on invalid events (for the event schemas that the server is able to see/validate).

In practice, I think we solved this with [MSC2801](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2801) by saying that event bodies are untrusted content, though I think it'd be worth spelling out in a new MSC.

Reviewer 4: Have removed this sentence. Wdyt?

Reviewer 3: seems sensible to me, thanks!

Reviewer 8: > Have removed this sentence. Wdyt?

err I think that is a retrograde step, sorry.

MSC2801 says that clients (and servers) must be prepared to handle events which do not match the specification. This sentence ("If any of these conditions is not met, clients and servers should treat the event as if it does not contain a relationship") is useful information for clients to know *how* they should handle such events. The less we can leave as "implementation-dependent" the better.

The point of this thread is almost orthogonal: Just because we might receive malformed events over federation doesn't necessarily mean that servers should necessarily accept such events from local clients via the C-S API. That is what #2178 is asking. I think it could be easily addressed by adding words to this MSC such as "Servers should reject such events when they are received via the client-server API"; however I am also conscious that there are two hours left to run on the FCP, making it a bit late for messing with. (And, as noted in other threads, better we get *something* here than wait forever to achieve perfection).

In short (http://www.apache.org/foundation/voting.html#expressing-votes-1-0-1-and-fractions):

 * -0.7 for https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/commits/e0271331b2e7dee236349aa63eec3cec7369e361
 * +0.2 for adding another sentence "Servers should reject events not meeting these conditions with an HTTP 400 error when they are received via the client-server API"

A more complete solution to this has been deferred to
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675). 

## Tradeoffs

### Event shape

Shape of

```json
"content": {
    "m.relates_to": {
        "m.reference": {
            "event_id": "$another:event.com"
        }
    }
}
```
versus

```json
"content": {
    "m.relates_to": {
        "rel_type": "m.reference",
        "event_id": "$another:event.com"
    }
}
```

The reasons to go with `rel_type` is:
 * This format is now in use in the wider matrix ecosystem without a prefix,
   in spite of the original MSC 1849 not being merged. This situation is not ideal
   but we still don't want to break compatibility with several clients.
 * We don't need the extra indirection to let multiple relations apply to a given pair of
   events, as that should be expressed as separate relation events.
 * If we want 'adverbs' to apply to 'verbs' in the subject-verb-object triples which
   relations form, then we apply it as mixins to the relation data itself rather than trying
   to construct subject-verb-verb-object sentences.
 * We decided to not adopt the format used by `m.in_reply_to` as it allows for multiple relations

>    and is hence overly flexible. Also, the relation type of `m.in_reply_to` is also overly specific

Reviewer: I said this before, but I am still not happy with only having a single relation. I would much rather go with my [MSC3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051).

The reasons of why I think multiple relations are needed are spelled out on that MSC and in a few comments on this one. We also have MSCs, which explicitly want multiple relations, like this one: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2881

So I want people to consider, if multiple relations are actually something we don't want, or if there is a use for them. If this MSC gets merged, it will encourage people to build on top of it. Changing the relation format will be much harder. There is some validity to the argument, that this format is widely used and as such should finally be officially part of the spec, but I would argue clients didn't really have much of a choice in implementing this format, because otherwise they would have gotten a lot of bug reports for not supporting features like redactions or edits, because those are pretty invasive and popular.

Just because this is the widely used format, doesn't mean it needs to land in the spec, if there is a goal to replace it in the future with a different format. This MSC could simply be documenting a feature, which isn't part of the official spec, but widely used and the spec process could focus on an alternative format and push that out faster with a migration path.

Take this with a grain of salt, because I obviously prefer my own MSC, but I would like a decision that includes at least a reference to that MSC, since it is a competing proposal. <3

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure there's a strong usecase for multiple relations, but MSC3501 sounds like it'd be the place to discuss that in more detail.

While this MSC is not perfect, we're a lot more interested in unblocking MSCs which rely on this MSC landing, which includes the history of this MSC being used in production for far too long due to prior mistakes. Sorry.

Reviewer: My concern is, that if this lands in the spec as is, there is no interest in looking at multiple relations at all. Encouraging implementations to build on top of a less than ideal framework will make it harder to change that framework, if it does turn out to have issues. Even if this MSC is already in wide use, if you merge it into the spec because of that, that just makes it harder to switch away in the future. MSCs that benefit from multiple relations will be conflicting with MSCs, that are fine with a single relation. Because of that I want a clear decision, why a single relation should be good enough for all cases and why the motivating use cases for multiple relations on MSC3501 are not strong enough to pick that format instead before this MSC is merged.

I made a separate proposal to bundle the concerns, that were spread over multiple comments on this MSC and provide an easy way to compare both approaches. There are limitations with this MSC, that have turned up from using that feature in production for a while. I would appreciate a clear decision of why those things don't need to get resolved and we want to go with a, in my opinion, suboptimal experience, instead of fixing them now. If an MSC lands in the spec, I expect it to be a stable building block for the next few years and not to be deprecated in the near future. Moving the discussion to #3051 and merging this MSC now, effectively is a vote to not adopt #3051 in the near future. I am okay with that decision, if the motivating use cases for #3051 are addressed. I just don't want to feel like they weren't paid attention  to or not understood and once we start building on top of this MSC, we notice that the issues were actually valid and we can't easily fix them anymore.

Reviewer 3: I'm not entirely convinced that merging this MSC prevents other MSCs from manipulating the structure. While this MSC provides a primary relation, there is already the (extremely common) conflict of rich replies: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#rich-replies

A similar system can be used for providing secondary or even tertiary relationships as well, with backwards compatibility to ensure that systems can form at least one relationship. 

It's not a perfect system, but it is the pragmatic approach for this MSC. I don't see the resolution on this MSC causing other MSCs like 3501 to close or not be considered: it's just an evolution of the feature.

In addition, as already mentioned, this MSC aims to document what is currently used in production. Due to historical reasons (namely the lack of unstable prefixing), this MSC and others in the series ended up in production which means the priority became documenting the system as it stands, not as how it could be. Because of this, a whole unstable prefix and implementation process was created to avoid this exact scenario: all MSCs created since then are expected to trial the implementation ahead of FCP to ensure that they are fit for purpose, and that the implementation not pollute final namespaces in the event it needs to change dramatically. This MSC is simply documenting what exists, and thus has an implementation for modern standards, and is being accepted as such.

I suggest that 3501 and other similar MSCs reconsider their position to allow for a more iterative process rather than binary. Usecases for multiple relationships are best discussed not-here.

Reviewer: It was said multiple times that an MSC, that just documents an existing practice, does not need to be merged into the spec. That was a suggestion to some of the more niche use cases, but I think it could apply to any MSC.

#3051 has an easy fallback to a single relation, it is described at the very end of the proposal section. It is just not very pretty to have 3 ways to do the same thing in the spec. Especially since most clients don't even handle the interaction of rich replies with other relations already.

Reviewer 8: > It was said multiple times that an MSC, that just documents an existing practice, does not need to be merged into the spec.

Something of a tangent, I suspect, but could you explain this comment? The conclusion of what you're saying seems to be that there is no need for the spec and practice to match, which I would absolutely disagree with it. (It certainly wouldn't be my choice to have practice established first and then the spec have to catch up, but that horse has bolted in this case.)

There is a plausible argument to say that we don't need an MSC *at all* before updating the spec to document existing practice, but I don't see how that helps your point; and generally I'd rather we had the MSC document to explain some of the history and justifications.

Reviewer 3: There's a difference between landing something from pre-1.0 and post-1.0, where this falls post-1.0. The fact that it's existing practice is why the MSC process exists, and why we are trying to uphold this MSC to that process as best as we can.

I appreciate that 3501 may be the better solution, however in the interest of the ecosystem we're aiming to get this particular MSC out. I don't believe that there's so many issues that we need 3 relation formats. This is best discussed on other MSCs though, as already mentioned.

Reviewer: > Something of a tangent, I suspect, but could you explain this comment?

I think I misunderstood some comments made in the spec room, which lead me to that understanding, but reading up on the MSCs, where I read that, doesn't seem to match up with that. #3302 was just closed, the pre 1.0 stuff doesn't count and stuff like #3309 is actually trying to get into the spec. I still think having this MSC document existing practice, not merging it and encouraging client devs to use something different, is a valid avenue, but it doesn't have precedent to stand on it seems. Sorry about that.

I would still like an explicit answer to some of the motivation for #3051. Not just "I don't think there are enough use cases for it". Because a single relation is limiting, clients and MSCs are trying to find workarounds for that already today:

- for https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/issues/10391 https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/issues/13811 was opened, but then closed as a spec issue
- Threads have limitations, like not being able to shove something into a thread after the fact
- https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2881 is just not possible.

We should unblock those features or decide, that they are not worth the extra complexity explicitly, not just ignore them. They used to be comments on this MSC and were then mostly moved to #3051. I don't think we should need multiple relation formats, we should have one that is flexible enough for all relation features to build on top of. Otherwise each MSC using relation seems to reinvent different and incompatible ways to work around the limitation of having a single relation (new relations in new_content for edits, abusing that replies are not a relation in threads, finding a format not based on threads for #2881). Should clients build on top of a single relation and find workarounds or should they instead choose multiple relations, where they hopefully don't need workarounds. I think passing this MSC will encourage the former.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051 has two answers in this thread already: not enough usecases, and not materially blocked by the technical proposal here. It has a path forward that can (and should) be considered separately. 

Message editing is a concern for https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676, the MSC which introduces it.

Thread limitations are best discussed on the threads MSC.

Message attachments is still possible I'm sure, though that MSC has broken Git history that makes it difficult to see what would change.

I'm not sure how many more ways I can say that from a technical perspective this MSC does not prevent other MSCs going through, but I can say that this MSC is materially blocking a number of other MSCs from even making progress, so the pragmatic approach is to land it in its less-than-perfect state for further iteration and improvement.

Reviewer: My concern is that the limitation of this MSC to only have a single relation causes artifacts in MSCs built on top of it, that are not fixable without replacing this MSC with a different one. And we should have a more stable foundation for relations in the spec to build on instead of what this MSC provides. Yes, the issues are in other MSCs, but they stem from the design of this MSC and the spec should provide a layered approach, where MSCs can build on top of each other without reworking the lower layers.

Reviewer 3: *We [discussed this in the spec room](https://matrix.to/#/!NasysSDfxKxZBzJJoE:matrix.org/$lPsR32GAfvPlsAKyn3LlgnZF7HAGJcLPoZg6bK8U4pI?via=matrix.org&via=libera.chat&via=envs.net) and it sounds like resolution has been achieved: this proposal can move forward and other proposals can take care of making it better.*

* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.
* [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267) defines how events
  can make a reference to other events.
* [MSC3389](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3389) defines changes to
  the redaction algorithm, to preserve the type and target id of a relation.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces the concept of relations, which can be used to
associate new information with an existing event.

A relationship is an object with a field `rel_type`, which is a string describing the type of relation,
and a field `event_id`, which is a string that represents the event_id of the target event of this relation.
The target event must exist in the same room as the relating event is sent.
Both of those fields are required. An event is said to contain a relationship if its `content` contains
a relationship with all the required fields under the `m.relates_to` key. If any of these conditions is not met,
clients and servers should treat the event as if it does not contain a relationship.

> Servers should reject events not meeting these conditions with an HTTP 400 error when they are received via the client-server API

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Servers should reject events not meeting these conditions with an HTTP 400 error when
they are received via the client-server API.
```

# MSC2674: Event relationships

It's common to want to send events in Matrix which relate to existing events -
for instance, reactions, edits and even replies/threads.

This proposal is one in a series of proposals that defines a mechanism for
events to relate to each other.  Together, these proposals replace
[MSC1849](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849).

* This proposal defines a standard shape for indicating events which relate to
  other events.
* [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) defines APIs to
  let the server calculate the aggregations on behalf of the client, and so
  bundle the related events with the original event where appropriate.
* [MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) defines how
  users can edit messages using this mechanism.
* [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) defines how
  users can annotate events, such as reacting to events with emoji, using this
  mechanism.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces the concept of relations, which can be used to
associate new information with an existing event.

> Relations are any event which have an `m.relates_to` field in their

Reviewer 9: Does this mean literally *any* event? As in, every single type of event can - validly - contain a relation to another event? Or is there only a specified subset of event types (eg. "events in the timeline of a room") for which there is defined relation behaviour?

Reviewer: In theory all events can have a relation, although currently it mostly just makes sense for timeline events, like call events, device verification, reactions, edits. But in theory one could probably also construct use cases, where it makes sense for a state event to use a relation, like for pinned events or so?

Reviewer 9: I guess the question here is mostly whether we want to make the valid applications explicit in the spec, or not. Otherwise we might end up with a pocket of undefined behaviour, where the semantics of a relation type differ depending on where it is used, in an unspecified manner (especially for custom relation types).

Reviewer 10: > In theory all events can have a relation, although currently it mostly just makes sense for timeline events, like call events, device verification, reactions, edits. But in theory one could probably also construct use cases, where it makes sense for a state event to use a relation, like for pinned events, bans as replies, etc.

Pinned events would be an interesting usecase where we'd need to reference multiple events at once and then this entire MSC falls apart...

Reviewer: I think it makes sense to have each MSC, that adds a relation type, suggest, on what event types it should be used.

Examples:
- replies: message types to message types. Maybe in exceptional cases to state events.
- references: User verification stages to other user verification stages.
- edits: Only message types. State event edits should be ignored.
- pin: only the pinned state event to arbitrary message events.

I don't think this MSC should place any restrictions on this. Custom relation types would probably be only shown by clients supporting them, so I would say they don't matter much. Servers should just handle events independently of their event type.

Reviewer 4: Given that this MSC does not even define any rel_types, it wouldn't make sense to put any restrictions in here for relations either. Other MSCs can either make suggestions or requirements what event types should be using which rel_types.

Reviewer 4: I have tried to clarify this in the MSC

> Relations are any event which have an `m.relates_to` field in their

Reviewer: I think we can resolve this. Unless we change the format, we should go with `m.relates_to`. Otherwise we are just needlessly breaking now existing events.

> contents. The `m.relates_to` field must include a `rel_type` field that

Reviewer 8: "must", but at what level is this enforced? It might be simpler to say "should", with the implication that implementations encountering non-conforming events must handle them gracefully.

Reviewer 6: Synapse enforces that outgoing `m.room.message`s have a `body`, so IMO it would be reasonable to enforce that outgoing events with a `m.relates_to` object have a `rel_type` and `event_id`.

Reviewer 8: right, but it *doesn't* enforce that *incoming* `m.room.messages` have a `body`, which means that any client handling events received over federation needs to be prepared to deal with such missing bodies.

There's an argument that that is a poor situation, but generally I think it's safer to say "everyone must ensure that they can handle malformed events" than it is to say "we promise you will never see a malformed event".

Reviewer 9: Expecting all implementations to handle malformed events gracefully has undesirable long-term consequences, though.

When spec violations in the ecosystem are not caught and dealt with early, they will continue accumulating and ossifying until there effectively exists a *parallel* ad-hoc specification; to build a functioning implementation, you now don't just need to implement the formal spec, but also the sum of all deviations from it in all other implementations in the past and future.

Reviewer 8: We're veering off-topic here: basically I think that for the purpose of event relationships, we should honour the existing conventions, which is that clients must treat any event bodies as untrusted data. Whether it is a good idea to change that convention is a separate topic.

Reviewer 8: it seems I've been here before: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2178

Reviewer: The spec explicitly states that event bodies are untrusted data, so this is resolved imo: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2801

Author: Combining this thread, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/files#r460564991, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/files#r461579942, and https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2178, I'd like to propose a slight rewording to this to something like:

- relations are any event that has an `m.relates_to` field that is an object with `rel_type` and `event_id` fields.
- specific relation types may specify additional restrictions (e.g. what types of events the relations may reference, what event type the relation must be, etc.)
- if an event has `m.relates_to` that is not in the expected format, clients and servers should treat it as if it does not have that field, and treat it as not-a-relation.
- servers may enforce that events submitted by their own users follow that format.

Reviewer: I think the idea here is right, but the wording is a bit wrong. I wouldn't call events relations. Relations are only a small part of an event. More like "related events are any event, that has a relation, which is an object under the `m.relates_to` key, with a `rel_type` and `event_id`".

Reviewer 4: I've adjusted the wording, and clarified that events that don't have `rel_type` or `event_id` in their `m.relates_to` are not considered to contain a relation.

> contents. The `m.relates_to` field must include a `rel_type` field that

Reviewer 8: So m.relates_to should be a json object?

Reviewer: According to this proposal, yes.

Reviewer 4: Have also tried to clarify this

gives the type of relationship being defined, and the `event_id` field that
gives the event which is the target of the relation.  All the information about
the relationship lives under the `m.relates_to` key.

If it helps, you can think of relations as a "subject verb object" triple,
where the subject is the relation event itself; the verb is the `rel_type`
field of the `m.relates_to` and the object is the `event_id` field.

> We consciously do not support multiple different relations within a single event,

Reviewer: While I do have a different comment thread about that already, I wrote down some stuff for why an array of relations makes more sense than a single relation (with use cases) after a discussion with @ara4n. Since that is a bit long, I'm posting it as a separate thread.

# Context

There are at least 3 possible ways to structure relations inside of an event.
This document tries to describe those 3 and argue for why I prefer one over the
others. Since this document only tries to discuss the shape of the relations,
any key names are subject to change and should be treated as such.

## Historical single relation format

This was first defined in
[MSC1849](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849). It is based on
the existing `m.relates_to` format currently used for replies and looks as
follows (keynames subject to change):

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I <3 shelties",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I <3 shelties a lot!",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relationship": {
            "rel_type": "m.replace",
            "event_id": "$some_event_id"
        }
    }
}
```

This basically allows you to add a single relation on the top level. Any
additional relations the event may want to have, need to be added differently
(i.e. in `m.new_content` for edits). This is widely implemented (although using
`m.relates_to` instead of `m.relationship`.

This is from here on called the "single format" in this document.

## Alternative map relation format

Alternatively to the above format, one could allow different types of relations
at the same time. This only needs a minor change to the original reply format to
allow additional keys inside of a relation:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I <3 shelties",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I <3 shelties a lot!",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relationships": {
            "m.replace": {
	        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
	    },
            "m.thread": {
	        "event_id": "$some_event_id",
		"key": "unique_thread_id"
	    },
            "m.reply": {
	        "event_id": "$some_event_id"
	    }
        }
    }
}
```

This format allows you to have multiple relations at the same time, as long as
they are of a different type. This adds a some additional complexity to relation
parsing, but also makes event parsing somewhat independent of the related_to
events. For example, if you have an edit and a reply relation, you can handle
those in any order. With the "single relation" format, you would need to handle
the edit relation first, find the originally edited event, then notice it is a
reply and handle that too.

This is from here on called the "map format" in this document.

## Alternative array relation format

A bit more generic than the above format is using an array of relation instead
of a map of relation. That basically allows an arbitrary number of arbitrary
relation types. Limiting complexity would need to be enforced by clients or
servers.

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I <3 shelties",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I <3 shelties a lot!",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relationships": [
	    {
                "rel_type": "m.replace",
                "event_id": "$some_event_id"
            },
	    {
                "rel_type": "m.reply",
                "event_id": "$some_other_event_id"
            },
	    {
                "rel_type": "m.thread",
                "event_id": "$some_event_id",
		"key": "some_unique_id"
            },
	    {
                "rel_type": "m.reference",
                "event_id": "$some_event_id_a",
		"key": "a"
            },
	    {
                "rel_type": "m.reference",
                "event_id": "$some_event_id_b",
		"key": "b"
            },
	    {
                "rel_type": "m.reference",
                "event_id": "$some_event_id_c",
		"key": "c"
            }
	]
    }
}
```

This is from here on called the "array format" in this document.

# Motivating use-cases (not proposed)

## Editing reply relations

[MSC2676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676) proposes edits,
where one event is replaced by another. This uses the `m.replace` or `m.edit`
relation. Of course the original event can have relations of its own. This means
the single event format needs to find a way to deal with those relations, if the
edit is actually meant to change them. The following examples demonstrate, how
editing the reply relation could look.

### single format

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I <3 shelties (now replying to the right parent)",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I <3 shelties",
            "msgtype": "m.text",
            "m.relationship": {
                "rel_type": "m.reply",
                "event_id": "$the_right_event_id"
            }
        },
        "m.relationship": {
            "rel_type": "m.replace",
            "event_id": "$some_event_id"
        }
    }
}
```

Note: Remember that if the reply target is not changed in MSC2676, the reply
relation won't be sent. You need to look into the original event to figure the
relation out.

When you want to change the reply relation (or add it), you will need to add it
in the `m.new_content` key. This has several implications:

- The server does not have one canonical place to look for relations. It needs
    to understand each format, so that it can find additional relations (either
    for changes in `m.new_content` or for the unchanged reply relation in the
    original event.)
- `m.new_content` is required in any case. This means a fallback is required for
    most features in edits. (Other formats could make the fallback optional.)
- If the reply relation is not changed, the client needs to lookup the original
    event and "merge" them to render it properly. It can't just render the event
    at the position of the edited event_id, without looking up the original
    event content. (This means handling edits is a bit more complex and clients
    need to store relations separately instead of just persisting the event.)
- It breaks the naive definition of m.new_content, where all of its keys can
    just be copied into `content` over the existing keys, since that would
    overwrite the edit relation.
- You can't remove a reply relation.

### array and map format

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I <3 shelties (now replying to the right parent)",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I <3 shelties",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relationships": {
            "m.replace": {
                "event_id": "$some_event_id"
            },
            "m.reply": {
                "event_id": "$the_right_event_id"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I <3 shelties (now replying to the right parent)",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I <3 shelties",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relationships": [
            {
                "rel_type": "m.replace",
                "event_id": "$some_event_id"
            },
            {
                "rel_type": "m.reply",
                "event_id": "$the_right_event_id"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

Since both formats allow multiple relations, they can always send both
relations. The relations can be parsed in any order and the event is somewhat
independent of both the replied_to event and the replaced event. To render the
edit, you just need to look up the position of `$some_event_id`. To render the
reply relation, you still would need to look up the replied_to event, but you
will also be using that content to render something. The edit relation is just
used for positioning, so looking up the content is a bit of a waste (unless you
want to show the changes of course).

This also fixes a compatibility issue with the reply fallback, where an edited
reply has no reply relation on the top level, so on clients not supporting
edits, the reply fallback may not be stripped. This should not influence the
design decisions though, I hope, since the fallback should just be dropped.

On the other side, one could argue, that reply and edit relation are not order
independent and now the client needs to figure out the order. (I don't see that
as a valid issue though.) Furthermore both formats now require you to send all
relations. You can't just send a "diff" anymore. I'd argue this is a benefit
though, since it makes the whole event clearer. Instead you could drop the
`m.new_content` entirely to reduce event size.

Note: If you want to drop the fallback from replies, it would make sense to add
the replied_to event in `unsigned`, so that simple clients don't need to fetch
the related event using the network, which in some cases is one issue holding
rich replies back. This has not much to do with the aim of this document though,
but is for MSC2675. It does however make it possible to not access other events
at all, when rendering an edited reply.

## Multiple references in an event

In the future one may want to list all the events references in a message, so
that clients can smart link them. These may all be listed as relations of the
same type, which is only possible with the array format. A client then may show
a short preview for those events below the actual message.

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "Welcome to the discussion, please take a look at [a], [b] and [c], where we discussed a similar issue already.",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.relationships": [
            {
                "rel_type": "m.reply",
                "event_id": "$the_right_event_id"
            },
            {
                "rel_type": "m.reference",
                "event_id": "$exhibit_a",
                "key": "a"
            },
            {
                "rel_type": "m.reference",
                "event_id": "$exhibit_b",
                "key": "b"
            },
            {
                "rel_type": "m.reference",
                "event_id": "$exhibit_c",
                "key": "c"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

(This may still be possible with with a map like syntax, if you use multiple
nesting or so, but would make it a lot more complicated. In the single event
format, you would need to find a different way to relate to those events, i.e.
via links in body or formatted_body.)

## Replies and edits in threads

In theory you can build threads using relations. Some basic threading can be
done with replies, but proper threads may need one relation for the whole thread
to uniquely identify all messages belonging to a thread and hide/show them. Such
a relation could look like follows:

```json
{
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$event",
    "key": "thread_id"
},
```

In this case `$event` is the id of the event, that originally started the
thread. `thread_id` can be used to have multiple threads from the same event to
discuss separate issues for example.

If you still want to have a reply inside of the thread or edit a message inside
of the thread, you will still run into issues with the "single relation" format,
while the two alternate formats would have no issues.

# Conclusion

The "single relation" format has a bunch of limitations, that don't exist in the
other formats. While it is also the least complex, it moves the complexity
elsewhere, if you want to build advanced features with multiple composed
relations.

The "array" format seems to be the most future proof in my opinion and, while it
makes the single relation case slightly more complex, it makes all other cases
easier to handle generically (client and server side). It may have some cases
where clients and servers need to impose limits on the number of relations, but
they need to do that for other event content anyway. It also makes composition
very easy.

As such I would conclude the array format to be the right way forward, that
enables the most use cases. The only benefit of the "single" format is
complexity and that it is already used.

```json
{
    "relations": [
        {
            "rel_type": "m.in_reply_to",
            "event_id": "https://demo.codimd.org/KoGdk3CuRgCRijtNh5LlOA#",
            "key": "Matthew"
        },
        {
            "rel_type": "m.references_MSC",
            "event_id": "https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849"
        },
        {
            "rel_type": "m.edits_MSC",
            "event_id": "https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674"
        },
        {
            "rel_type": "m.references_MSC",
            "event_id": "https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2676"
        },
        {
            "rel_type": "m.references_MSC",
            "event_id": "https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675"
        },
}
```

Reviewer: There is https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051 to address that. So this is resolved by deciding between #2674 or #3051.

Author: @deepbluev7 Since we already have the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/files#r451128347 and it looks like #3051 mostly captures your conclusions in this thread, I'd like to propose that we resolve this thread and use https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/files#r451128347 or #3051 for discussions about this, rather than having two threads open. If there's any information above that you feel is important enough to keep for posterity, I'd suggest that you copy it to #3051, and then we can resolve this thread.

Reviewer: Sure, anything that reduces the number of open threads! I think I copied all the relevant stuff into #3051 already.

in order to keep the API simple, and in the absence of identifiable use cases.

> Instead, one would send multiple events, each with its own `m.relates_to`

Reviewer 9: I think that there is definitely a valid usecase for having multiple relations in one event: in forum-esque systems, it is common (and often even culturally expected, for noise reduction reasons) to selectively quote snippets from *multiple* posts in a single reply.

If we want Matrix to be usable for non-IM usecases, like the currently-ongoing forums-on-Matrix experiments, then ideally it should be possible to represent that kind of relation.

I also don't there's much simplification in the current proposal anyway, compared to @deepbluev7's second example; really the only difference is a keyed object vs. an array of typed objects, the conceptual model is otherwise the same.

I'd therefore also argue for supporting multiple relations of the same kind, in the interest of not unnecessarily painting ourselves into a corner for future usecases.

> Instead, one would send multiple events, each with its own `m.relates_to`

Reviewer 8: I must say, coming to this as a new reader, that it feels surprising that we are designing out the ability for an event to be both an edit and a reply. Allowing for multiple relationships seems like a good idea.

> Instead, one would send multiple events, each with its own `m.relates_to`

Reviewer: I guess this could be resolved by going with something like https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051 or explicitly stating, why multiple relations should not be supported. I don't think the simpler API alone is a good justification.

> Instead, one would send multiple events, each with its own `m.relates_to`

Reviewer 4: > I must say, coming to this as a new reader, that it feels surprising that we are designing out the ability for an event to be both an edit and a reply. Allowing for multiple relationships seems like a good idea.

You find this surprising because you'd expect the reply relation of the original message to be repeated in the edit, or you'd expect that you'd be able to edit the reply relation of the original event to another event or any other relation really?

> Instead, one would send multiple events, each with its own `m.relates_to`

Reviewer 4: > I must say, coming to this as a new reader, that it feels surprising that we are designing out the ability for an event to be both an edit and a reply. Allowing for multiple relationships seems like a good idea.

You find this surprising because you'd expect the reply relation of the original message to be repeated in the edit, or you'd expect that you'd be able to edit the reply relation of the original event to another event or any other relation really?

defined.

> A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined for future handling replies and

Reviewer 10: Also related: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2589#discussion_r432721273

> A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined for future handling replies and

Reviewer: Attaching myself here, I think this MSC needs to provide some guidance on how generalized a relationship should be. Either you make the relationship general, so the server handles it for you or you make it descriptive, so that the client knows, what to do with it. Examples:

- `m.reference`: Is this a reply? A label based thread? A swim lane? A reply thread?
- `m.annotation`: Is this a reaction? Is this additional information for the media event, aka #2881? Should Message attachments use a separate type?

As a client dev I prefer descriptive types, but it makes the serverside handling somewhat hard.

> A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined for future handling replies and

Reviewer: The MSC kind of addresses this by using a general rel_type to describe the server side aggregation and allowing subtypes to attach additional meaning to the relation types. I think that is okayish, but I would probably prefer the following:

Have one semantic rel_type in the relation, like reply, edit, reaction. Clients can add own namespaced versions of this. Because aggregation APIs won't understand that, have the client call the appropriate aggregation API, which tells the server how to aggregate:

Call `GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/relations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][/{key}]` to fetch the related events, call `GET /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomID}/aggregations/{eventID}[/{relationType}][/{eventType}][/{key}]` to get aggregated events.

The one thing where servers will then need to understand the event types, is when they inline the aggregation in `unsigned`. I think that is an acceptable tradeoff.

If this approach isn't chosen, this MSC should specify a key of how to attach semantic data to the relation and require clients to do that with every relation, i.e.:

```json
"m.relates_to" :    {
      "rel_type": "m.reference",
      "semantics": "m.reply",
      "event_id": "someid"
    }
```

> A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined for future handling replies and

Reviewer 4: > The MSC kind of addresses this by using a general rel_type to describe the server side aggregation and allowing subtypes to attach additional meaning to the relation types.

I've tried to clarify in the MSC that this is indeed the approach taken, without defining any `rel_type`s.

> A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined for future handling replies and

Reviewer 4: > this MSC should specify a key of how to attach semantic data to the relation and require clients to do that with every relation

I've tried to clarify that extra semantics are defined per `rel_type` and hence any subtype would also be defined in the MSC that defines the `rel_type`.

threading. This let you define an event which references an existing
event. When aggregated, this currently doesn't do anything special, but in
future could bundle chains of references (i.e. threads). These do not yet

> replace the [reply mechanism currently defined in the spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#rich-replies).

Author: @turt2live Now that this is in a shorter doc, is your concern resolved?

For instance, an `m.room.message` which references an existing event
would look like:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "i <3 shelties",
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.reference",
            "event_id": "$another_event_id"
        }
    }
}
```

Different subtypes of references could be defined through additional fields on
the `m.relates_to` object, to distinguish between replies, threads, etc.
This MSC doesn't attempt to define these subtypes.

>   XXX: do we want to support multiple parents for a m.reference event, if a

Author: Given that nobody has jumped in wanting multiple parents (separately from https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/files#r451128347), I think I'll just remove this.

>   XXX: do we want to support multiple parents for a m.reference event, if a

Reviewer: I think for multiple parents, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051 would be the right approach. Multiple different relations were at least wanted in another threads and multiple parents for the same rel_type are very similar to that.

>   XXX: do we want to support multiple parents for a m.reference event, if a

Author: I think that https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674/files#r451128347 and #3051 are sufficient for tracking this, so I've removed this `XXX:` comment.

  given event references different parents in different ways?

### Sending relations

Related events are normal Matrix events, and can be sent by the normal /send
API.

The server should postprocess relations if needed before sending them into a
room, as defined by the relationship type. For example, a relationship type
might only allow a user to send one related message to a given event.

Similar to membership events, a convenience API is also provided to highlight
that the server may post-process the event, and whose URL structures the
semantics of the relation being sent more clearly:

```

> PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send_relation/{parent_id}/{relation_type}/{event_type}/{txn_id}[?key={relation_key}]

Reviewer 10: Which parameters are optional? `relationship_type`, for example, should be optional, else we can run into lots of issues with e2ee down the road. See more context: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849#discussion_r446515510

Reviewer 6: The relation key is optional, everything else is required. The endpoint is fairly useless anyway, so I wouldn't spend time worrying about e2ee.

Reviewer 10: Sadly we will have to worry about it to make it e2ee compatible eventually, and with that one e2ee suggestion `relation_type` would be unknown.

If the endpoint is fairly useless, why add it at all and not stick to aggregations being added via normal message sending?

Reviewer: I don't think this endpoint provides much benefit for anyone, and I would just remove it. As it is, this MSC alone needs no special server support. This endpoint just adds an extra API, which very few clients may wish to use, for questionable benefits (since the server needs to understand the relations send via normal events anyway).

Furthermore the structure of it is quite complex, because it tries to fit a json object with 3 values into one http endpoint. Just adding the relationship to the event body seems considerably easier, even for the simplest of clients.

As such I propose to just strip the endpoint from the proposal.

Reviewer 4: Agreed, this endpoint is not useful and I've removed it from the MSC, as I'm not aware of any client using it (Have checked in all flavours of Element, and searched for "send_relation" in the Nheko and Fluffy Chat code). Synapse supports the endpoint, but I have filed an issue to remove support.

> PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send_relation/{parent_id}/{relation_type}/{event_type}/{txn_id}[?key={relation_key}]

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/messages/{parent_id}/send_relation/{relation_type}/{event_type}/{txn_id}[?key={relation_key}]
```

Wouldn't this be more semantically obvious (and consistent with how RESTful APIs are generally designed)? We already have the `/messages` endpoint to represent the full logical set of messages, and `send_relation` would conceptually operate on a single item in that set, so it would make sense to attach it to that.

Reviewer 6: Wouldn't `/event/` make more sense than `/messages/`? `/event/{eventId}` exists, `/messages/{eventId}` doesn't

Reviewer 9: Hmm, yeah, good point - I agree.

I wonder why `/messages` isn't called `/events` then, seems like a strange naming mismatch. But that's outside the scope of this MSC, of course.

Reviewer: This would be resolved by removing the endpoint, see the thread above.

Reviewer 4: The endpoint has indeed been removed, so resolving this.

{
    // event contents
}
```

The `parent_id` is the ID of the event being referenced. In other words, it is
the `event_id` field that will be in the `m.relates_to` object.

The `relation_key` is for relationships that have a `key` property.

The endpoint does not have any trailing slashes.

### Receiving relations

Relations are received during non-gappy incremental syncs (that is, syncs
called with a `since` token, and that have `limited: false` in the portion of
response for the given room) as normal discrete Matrix events.

[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) defines ways in
which the server may aid clients in processing relations by aggregating the
events.

### End to end encryption

Since the server has to be able to bundle related events, structural
information about relations cannot be encrypted end-to-end, and so the

> `m.relates_to` field should not be included in the ciphertext.

Reviewer 6: Wouldn't it be better to include `m.relates_to` in both the plaintext and ciphertext to prevent servers from faking things like replies?

It should be a fairly painless migration: just start including it in the ciphertext and ignore the plaintext version if it exists in the ciphertext.

Reviewer 10: See https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849#discussion_r446515510

Reviewer: I don't really see a downside to this and in my experience this does even make the implementation easier. We've run into the issue of multiple clients stripping out the relation, but leaving an `m.relates_to: null` in the ciphertext. Just copying the relation seems simpler and has the benefit of being harder to tamper with.

Reviewer 11: The other option would be signing the relation but that seems more complex and not worth it as we would expect that relations are often small.

The duplication also leaves open interesting possibilities such as adding additional context to the relationship in the ciphertext but omitting it in the relationship the server sees. This way you can have rich information without leaking it to the server. This would solve the "future MSC" issue in the following paragraph IIUC.

Another interesting feature would be client-only relationships. Obviously you can't have server support for indexing but for high-security scenarios this may be desired. However the tradeoffs with that would easily be a big MSC on its own.

Reviewer: Just be aware that many clients currently rely on the relations being unencrypted, so that they can process them partially already before decrypting them, like with edits and reactions, which don't show up at a position in the timeline usually. That would break, if you hide the relation in the cyphertext. But if you have the relation in both, there is no issue that I see (apart from what to do, if they are different and the bigger size of course).

Author: For now, I've changed this to say that the `m.relates_to` must be present in the plaintext, rather than forbidding it from being in the ciphertext.  The "future MSC" that defines encrypted aggregations can say whether it should also be in the ciphertext.

Reviewer: I guess that is okay for now. I would prefer it, if we could mandate the whole relation to be also in the ciphertext, but clients would have to deal with them not being there anyway, since right now that is not the case and we would need to define how to handle them being different, etc. So leaving that for a future MSC sounds like a good idea.

Reviewer 4: Moved the section about e2ee here, and linked this thread [there](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675/files#r662322726).

A future MSC may define a method for encrypting certain parts of the
`m.relates_to` field that may contain sensitive information.

### Redactions

Relations may be redacted like any other event. In the case of `m.reference` it
removes the referencing event.

The `m.relates_to`.`rel_type` and `m.relates_to`.`event_id` fields should
be preserved over redactions, so that clients can distinguish redacted edits
from normal redacted messages, and maintain reply ordering.

  FIXME: synapse doesn't do this yet

>   XXX: Does this require a new room version?

Reviewer 8: Yes. Changing the redaction algorithm changes the way that event hashes are calculated.

Reviewer 10: So....what to do with existing room versions? They'll just never get events?

The problem is that there are e.g. a lot of DM rooms that are stuck forever on room version 1: Noone will want to upgrade them as that would mean creating an entirely new room and thus losing all DM history you ever had with someone. As such, we unfortunately still have to consider old room versions.

Reviewer 10: Also, looking at the spec for that ( https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/unstable#reference-hashes ? ) the event id doesn't seem to depend on redaction algorithm at all

Reviewer 6: > So....what to do with existing room versions? They'll just never get edits/reactions/etc.?

The redaction algorithm change in question would make redacted events keep their relation metadata. It's only needed so that redacting a message along with all its edit history wouldn't spawn a ton of redaction placeholders. It doesn't prevent using edits/reactions/etc in old rooms, it just makes UX slightly worse.

Author: Yes, that sounds about right.  So we'd say that the redaction algorithm would stay the same for current room versions, but will change in some future version.  Edits would still work in all room versions, but redacted edits will be a bit ugly in the current room versions.

Reviewer: I wonder if it wouldn't be easier to make it explicit in the spec, that redacted events should not be served to clients. That way you sidestep this entire issue and in practice servers do not seem to send redacted events to clients. So only the client would need to remember, that the event was an edit, when it gets redacted, and that should be easy enough to handle without a new room version. I'm not sure what the current specs stance is on serving redacted events to clients.

Author: I've made the changes here that I said I would, so resolving.

> ## Edge Cases

Author: In the thread at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1849/files#r283972405:

TravisR says:

> how does all of this interact when you've ignored the user who reacted, edited, etc someone else's message? For example: User A (not ignored) says something that User B (ignored) edits - does the server send the edit down or does it let the conversation diverge?

KitsuneRal says:

>     1. If you ignore a user, their activity should not come through to you - otherwise edits become an effective side-channel for the ignored user to reach those who ignored them.
> 
>     2. I'm pretty reserved against cross-user edits without an editor having an elevated power level for that: think of "edit wars" that Wikipedia is so well-known for. Alternatively, a room admin should have ability to "seal" the message (along with marking the specific edit as final) to protect it from further edits.
> 
>     3. For the same reason I believe that edits (unlike annotations and replies) should form a DAG, with the strictly ordered special "seal" event to stop further edits from being accepted to the DAG. Servers should be able to linearise it in a similar (same?) way we linearise room state transitions now.

TravisR says:

> It seems like given the aggregations happening in the proposal that the client can still receive the aggregation for ignored users (which is fine, I think) in terms of a count. The new APIs should probably filter them out though, and mention that they do this.

ara4n says:

> In an ideal world, i'd prefer that we filtered out all relations from ignored users - including aggregated reaction counts. It's awful if you've ignored someone who's harassing you, and then see anonymous +1 eggplant reactions or whatever all over your msgs.
> 
> erikjohnston how do we handle this atm in synapse?

erikjohnston says:

> I believe we filter out reactions from ignored user, except when doing aggregate counts. I'm a bit wary of committing to having the counts take account of ignored users as that explodes the complexity of the calculation, which happens anytime we send events down to the client.

ara4n says:

agreed that it explodes the complexity... but it also does introduce quite a miserable harassment vector. :/

erikjohnston says:

Yeah, its not ideal but I'm just not sure matrix.org would handle the extra load terribly well.

KitsuneRal says:

What about a partial solution like replacing the count with zero if all reactions are from ignored users?

Reviewer 4: Moving this discussion to #2675 as server-side aggregations are where this problem comes into play, and are out of scope for this MSC.

   pulling the missing ones in.
 * Could we also ask the server, after a gap, to provide all the relations which
   happened during the gap to events whose root preceeded the gap.
   * "Give me all relations which happened between this set of
     forward-extremities when I lost sync, and the point i've rejoined the DAG,
     for events which preceeded the gap"?
   * Would be hard to auth all the relations which this api coughed up.
     * We could auth them based only the auth events of the relation, except we
       lose the context of the nearby DAG which we'd have if it was a normal
       backfilled event.
     * As a result it would be easier for a server to retrospectively lie about
       events on behalf of its users.
     * This probably isn't the end of the world, plus it's more likely to be
       consistent than if we leave a gap.
       * i.e. it's better to consistent with a small chance of being maliciously
         wrong, than inconsistent with a guaranteed chance of being innocently
         wrong.
   * We'd need to worry about pagination.
   * This is probably the best solution, but can also be added as a v2.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * In practice this seems to not be an issue, which is worth complicating the s-s API over. Clients very rarely jump over the federation gap to an edit. In most cases they scroll up, which backfills the server and we have all the edits, when we reach the event before the gap.
 
```

I can't remember ever having seen this, so I think it is fine to just declare this as out of scope for now.
